---
title: One year at Microsoft
date: 2021-08-30T09:42:03+05:30
lastmod: 2021-08-30T09:42:03+05:30
author: MajAK
avatar: /img/me.png
# authorlink: https://author.site
cover: /img/microsoft_b1.png
categories:
  - Experience
tags:
  - microsoft
  - anniversary
# nolastmod: true
draft: false
---

**A summary of my short stint of a year at Microsoft as a SDE and my experience from back in college to the last day of work!**
<!--more-->

## Some Context on Me

Hi. I am Kushal. I was __not someone__ who always dreamt of pursuing CS as a career. I was not what you would call a goal-oriented human and to be honest, I still am not. Coming from a relatively small city and an average school, I was not aware of what _"The Internet"_ was! Back in school I did not have opportunities like others in my college did. Like every other student in my school, Computer was the subject that __just existed__, it was science that everyone had a liking for. I still remember in 12th grade I had a special liking for __Mathematics__ and pursuing it were my initial thoughts. After going through the typical JEE process, it was time to choose a college and more than that a field. Took some advice, saw my __rank__ :) and looking back I consider it nothing less than a __miracle__ that unknowingly I got into __IIIT-H__, a place where I actually liked what I was learning and building. I would say I was an __above-average__ for a student(_weird flex but ok_) and I probably spent __most__ of my __time__ on the __Basketball court__, but yeah I liked what I was doing. I explored a lot of fields, did a bit of __academic research__ and like every other college student went through the BT of internships and placements. There is a lot of drama in college life, but that is for some other time, for now all we need to know is I started with Microsoft thanks to my __college placements__.

## The Placement process - My Interview experiences

With the placement season coming up, I was a bit __worried__ because the “CP kinda coding”. It is __not__ something that I __enjoy__, I was average at it, learnt from whatever was taught in courses. Had done a bit of it during my internship days and gave some contests here and there. But yeah I was not great at it. But I was not tense. Usually I am __not tense__. Before what they call _“The Placement Season”_, I had an __off campus__ interview scheduled with __google__ in __January__ so there was a backup at the back of my mind. But call it __fate__, it got converted to an on campus interview. Google was the first company to come on campus. The interviews started at around 12 AM and the first interview went __average__, I was surprised I got a second one, which I thought I aced but that is when I got rejected :D And then started a __chain of rejections__. One of the __primary reasons__ was obviously __coding__. The questions were too tough, with some whose __complexities__ itself were even __hard to digest__ and I still wonder what was the point of such questions. I remember I got shortlisted for almost every company I sat for and after a string of rejections came Microsoft! Microsoft is known for standard coding rounds and a __fair bit of structure__ in the interview process. In all fairness, for personal reasons it was one of the companies I surely did not want to join! But call it fate :P I did not do great in the coding round to start with and did not expect to get shortlisted. But thanks to good academic record and not so strict screening criteria I got __shortlisted__ for physical rounds. I was a bit skeptical initially on whether I wanted to “Tank” the interview(considering I had worked with __Kafka__ and was in the waiting list of confluent), but then I got some __good advice__ and decided to give the interviews with due diligence. Tbh it was a very smooth journey for me personally, with not so much pressure from the interviewers themselves. The first was a written coding round which was __quite basic__ in all honesty. Also being more concentrated on what I was interested in, they went quite well for me. Two more rounds into the interview process I was told I was selected. It was not just a __sigh of relief__ but also a quick realization that it had __not__ been a __week__ but was just __two days__ of _“The Placement Season”_!

## The Beginning

Fast forward __6 months__ from the placement day, I had a job. I felt I was a grown man only to realize later on I was not xD I was told you will be working with __SNow Data Analytics__ team and was introduced to my manager. I was set to report to him on __13th of july__ _(2020)_. It was the first day, I set up my system, talked to my manager and he briefed me a bit about what the team does. Trust me I have __never felt so dumb__ in my life and I usually don’t feel dumb. Obv Rajesh(My manager) was there saying that it is normal and it takes time to understand things, but I was used to building systems over a week in college and this was a whole new playing field itself. There was a lingo that was different, a tech stack which was different and there was so much complexity.

Rajesh had a very systematic plan in place, which he called a __30-60-90 day plan__. He left it up to me on what I wanted to learn, but the idea was to learn a lot and gradually shift into work. I obviously had tremendous support from Deepak, Ravi and Swetha _(my teammates)_ in explaining the silliest things to me. I remember disturbing them for the __silliest things__ and probably hats-off to them for dealing with me peacefully. I still remember I used to ask them a few things again and again _(because my memory duh!)_ and their response was always calm, with a note : __Try documenting things__. I remember I took my first three months in a very chill manner, just learning at a __slow pace__, which left my parents to wonder : _Why does this kid get paid :P_

## The _“Actual”_ Beginning

I had already started working on a few things in my first 3 months itself, but now it was time to take responsibility and make mistakes. 3 months into my job, now I was given equal _(although limited and easier)_ work as my colleagues. I still remember messing up the __PROD__ Database a few times and learning the importance of why __DEV__ exists. I remember initially how tough it was to attend early morning meetings. Then I started taking responsibility as a DRI/on-call, which meant I was responsible for complete system health and bugs/issues for that period of time and now when I look back it was a smooth(although tough), thanks to the __3 months of learning__ that I had.

Apart from work, I really liked how Microsoft respects __work-life balance__. I still remember having some work pending and was planning to work on weekend, when my team lead said that I should not work on weekends, it is okay to delay it to Monday(even though it was __low key important__). The ideology was simple and full of respect. Although having less experience, I never felt that my views were not being respected. Apart from that, there were a lot of __perks and bonuses__ which made me feel appreciated. I think I can go to the lengths of saying that there is no company out there which __cares__ so much about their employees and showers them with so many perks. They make you feel a part of the company’s success :D

## Added Responsibilities

So around a __quarter__ from onboarding, one of my __teammates__ Swetha was supposed to go on __maternity leave__. Initially as a team we were wondering if we could take all the work planned for the quarter. Our team used to do Co-Development _(Co-Dev)_ with the Data Quality Service’s team __(DQS)__, which Swetha used to look into majorly and I had a very brief idea of it’s working. Along with that we were planning to onboard our customers to Data Lake Solution and retire SQL. So there were a __lot of efforts__ that were going to go into it. That is when the team made a collective decision that I would __take over__ the co-dev work with DQS and contribute a bit to the decommissioning and onboarding customers to the new solution process.

I think there was a phase of a few days, when I was __clueless__ once again on how DQS as well as Data Lake(EDL) worked. But I was __lucky__. DQS and EDL both used __python/spark__. I had used it before so I felt a bit more in the comfort zone. I started with DQS and implemented the required feature’s __mainframe__ in a very short period of time. There were bugs and silly issues, but iteratively they got solved. It sounds quite simple right now but it was a __long tiring process__ and took almost a month to get rid of all bugs.
It was around that time that we started __onboarding__ our customers to EDL. But that was the easy part. There were a lot of __discrepancies__ in data in our three solutions : SQL, Kusto and EDL. The actual Data was there on the ServiceNow platform which we pulled using __APIs__. Not that it was not expected, but it was the scale that left us surprised. I remember I was usually tasked with comparing the counts and the data. I wrote some complicated __python scripts__ to generate even more complicated __KQL queries__ to make the whole process simple. All in all it helped me a lot, since it was lightning fast. I remember the long nights and it was tiring. Luckily I did not have to deal with our customers a lot, but we were on __strict deadlines__. Also it is hard to deboard when people usually don’t check mail :P I also remember we came across bugs which were there in the system for months now.

## The Chaos and the Peace

We initially solved the configuration bugs only to realize there were more. Now here was the issue : The data we are dealing with here is __not small__, it is like a __million rows__ and hundreds of attributes. Also, it was too close to the deadline and we had dependency on the EDL team. So a few more __late nights__ and after a lot of chaos, we were on the verge of completion. I had not worked on such a __huge scale__ before, so that feeling for me was __fulfilling__. I think those 3 weeks would have been the toughest ones for me in my one year at microsoft.

In all this work, I forgot that I had to deal with DQS too. I started testing our resources with the updated features and… it failed. There was not just one but a __string of errors__. Here was the issue : There was not much time left till the deadline, onboarding resources was a ton of __manual work__ and the DQS team was based in the US. So it was hard to have long interactions. I still remember having calls at around __3AM__ and __debugging the issues__ with them. It was a lot of fun, laughing at us missing silly points, but the mornings felt hard. Surprisingly so deep into my career at Microsoft, __the support__ and __the motivation__ was __ample__. I did not even realize how time flew by and how we were done with two quarters and met our deliverables.

This is when two big changes took place : Firstly our team was getting __more autonomous__, we were going to take more responsibilities which later transitioned to taking a completely new work itself and secondly I got a __great opportunity__ to __pursue Research__ as a career at google. Those who know me know that research was something I looked at as my next career step, but did not realize it would come __so early__. Little did I know that it meant my days at Microsoft were almost over. Since Google was a __competing company__ I was not supposed to work for 45 days. I kind of wanted to work, but seeing that it was just brainstorming we had to do, my manager was of the thought that it was going to be fine and it was not required. So I had 45 days of a paid vacation in my luck and obviously there was COVID and obviously I was not productive but it felt like a much needed break.

## My Takeaway

So here I stand after first week of my new job, thinking how fun my journey actually was. I __learnt__ to __appreciate others__ and tbh learnt a lot about working professionally. The __technological aspect__ just seems a __small__ part of the big picture now. I felt great the way I was __appreciated__ and __supported__ back in Microsoft, even though I was __bidding farewell__. The experience was nothing I expected to be, with the added fun part that my team had never seen me physically. Being as childish as I am, I liked how Microsoft gives gifts almost every quarter and on a serious note I loved how __structured__ things were. I did miss interacting with humans outside my team, probably because of me being a __bit__ of an __introvert__ and the whole setup __being virtual__, but all in all it was a __ßfun year__ I spent <3
